- So in the previous lecture,
we installed Flutter and Android Studio
so that we can build
Android apps with Flutter.
Now in this lecture, we'll
create a Flutter project
and see how we can then edit the code
and how we can run this Flutter app
that will be in that
project, on our emulator.
And for this, we go back
to this command prompt.
In there, we have this Flutter command,
which we can now use,
and we can also use it
to create new projects.
Now for this, you first of all,
should navigate inside
of this command prompt
into the folder where you
wanna create your project.
And you can use the CD command for that,
which stands for change directory.
And here you could, for example,
CD into a folder named development,
if you have such a folder.
I did create that folder
before, in my user folder.
And then in that development folder,
you can CD into sub folders.
Now I don't have any sub folders yet,
so what I'll quickly do is in Explorer,
I'll go into that folder,
create a new folder there,
which I'll name projects.
Name is up to you.
And then here, back in the command prompt,
I can navigate into this
projects folder by typing CD proj
and then I hit tab for auto completion.
And now I'm in that path
where I wanna create
my new Flutter folder, and you should use
some global path like this.
Now, once you have that folder,
you can use the flutter command again,
but now we'll run flutter
create to create a new project.
And then when you use that command,
which is exposed by Flutter,
you need to give your project a name.
And I'll name it first_app here.
You should use a name that
is something like this
that does not contain any wide
space, no dashes, no dots,
instead under scores if
you have multiple words
which you wanna separate.
And then you can hit enter,
and this will now create
a brand new Flutter project in there,
hence in the Explorer
and the projects folder,
I now have this first_app folder,
and now we want to open that
with some tool that allows us
to view and edit the code.
We could use Android Studio for that,
but since it's a bit heavy
and a bit slow in my opinion,
I will use a different tool
which has great Flutter support,
and that's Visual Studio Code.
You can search for VS Code
to find code.visualstudio.com,
and VS Code is a free IDE,
a free code editor provided by Microsoft,
which you can download
for all operating systems,
which allows you to edit
code, not just Flutter code,
but a lot of other programming
languages and frameworks
as well, but it does have
great Flutter support as well.
So here I'll just
download it, and then once
that download finished I'll
execute this installer,
which it gives me,
accept the agreement,
use the default location,
keep all the other defaults,
and make sure it's added to your path.
This here is in German,
but it basically says
that it's added to the path variable.
So I'll keep that and then install it.
And now this will install
this Visual Studio Code tool
on our system, which we
can use for editing code.
So let's wait for this to finish,
and then we can also start it right away.
And if you start it, you
see something like this,
a little starting screen where
you can also choose a theme,
and I'll go with the dark theme.
You can also edit this if
you go to file, preferences,
and then color theme, here
you can also switch the theme,
and I'll use dark plus.
Close this, and then
before we open a project,
we'll also install a couple of extensions
because a great feature of
Visual Studio Code is that
it has built in extensions support,
and extensions are
basically just plug-ins,
which you can install
into Visual Studio Code.
So for that, we can go to view, extensions
or use this shortcut here
or click on extensions here on the left.
And then there, there are
a couple of extensions
you should install.
Most importantly, you want
to search for Flutter here
and install this Flutter extension.
This helps you with writing
Flutter code and provides
great support whilst you
are writing Flutter code.
So inside of this editor,
you'll then get great support for Flutter.
This also installed a Dart
extension automatically,
which will help with Dart code in general,
and Flutter user start, as you learned.
And last but not least, I'll
search for Material Icon,
which is totally optional,
but which changes
the look of the file icons,
and I like that look.
I'm using it throughout this
course, and if you want it too,
you can install this
Material Icon Theme here
to get that icon look,
and then in this dropdown
which opens, I'll select
Material Icon Theme
to set my icon look to it.
Click activate here as well.
Okay, so now I got all
these things installed.
Now we can open our newly
created Flutter project
with Visual Studio Code, and
for that here under file,
I'll choose open folder and then go into
the development folder, projects,
and select this first_app folder,
the entire folder and choose that folder.
And then here, I'm prompted
whether I want to trust
this folder, and I'll choose yes here.
I'll also accept the
recommended VS Code settings
for Dart and Flutter and
click on yes here as well.
Now here, we got this Flutter project
opened up in Visual Studio Code.
Now the starting project
you get and the exact files
and folders you have in
there could vary over time,
and therefore, to ensure that
we're all on the same page,
attached you'll find my popspec.yaml file,
so this file here, and my
main.dart file in the lib folder,
and you should replace your
content in the lib folder
with my main.dart file so
if you have more folders
and files in the lib folder,
delete them all and use
my attached main.dart
file and drag it into
this lib folder and replace
your pubspec.yaml file with mine.
With that, we simply ensure that you have
exactly the same starting
configuration and project as I do
and you get the same output as I do.
And with that, we got this
set up and we can now run
this project here, and
of course also edit it.
Now I'll walk through the
different folders and files
and what we have here in
the next course section,
so I'll ignore that for now,
and instead, I wanna show you
how you can run such a Flutter project
as an Android app here
on this Android emulator
which we have up and running.
And this can be done by
going to terminal here
and clicking on new terminal
in the VS Code menu here.
And this is your system command prompt,
just integrated into VS Code.
The great thing about that is
that we can run commands in it
without leaving our project here
and without leaving our
code, so we can have
multiple things on the same screen.
And in here, what you can now
do to run your application
on this emulator is you
can run flutter run,
just make sure that this
emulator is up and running.
And then flutter run is
a command that will take
your Flutter code, convert it
to machine code for Android
in this case, since we
have an Android emulator
up and running, and run that
Android app on that emulator.
And later in the course,
you will also learn how to
run it on real devices and how to
build for different platforms.
Very important, you need to
run it inside of your project.
That's why I'm using this
integrated terminal because this
integrated terminal will
automatically be navigated into
this Flutter project so that this command
is executed from inside that project.
And if you now hit enter,
this will do what I just explained.
It will build your Flutter
project as an Android app
and then run it on that Android emulator.
Now in case this app is not started on your Android
emulator,
but instead built as a web app, for example,
you want to make sure that in Visual Studio Code
you can view that status bar at the bottom
because in that status bar you can select the
device on which this Flutter app will be executed.
So for which this Flutter app will be built.
And here you should make sure that you select
one of
these emulators if you have one up and running.
Alternatively, you start a new emulator
here and then you pick it as the target device.
You don't want
to pick Chrome, Edge, Windows or anything like that.
Instead, choose
your Android device, your Android emulator here.
Now the first time you execute this,
this can take a bit longer,
so definitely give this
some time, but eventually
it should be done,
and then start this Flutter
app as an Android app,
as a native Android app
on this Android simulator.
So let's wait for that to finish,
and by the way, this will be
quite slow and take some time
the first time you do this.
Subsequent changes and
restarts will be faster,
so no worries about that.
And now here for me
it's crashing, actually.
It's crashing with this error message
that Kotlin could not find
the required JDK tools.
If you're not getting this, perfect.
If you are getting it, what you have to do
is Google for, JDK 8, and
you should find this page
on oracle.com and then there,
pick the download version
for your system.
In my case, Windows.
Now, here we can then download this,
and unfortunately we have
to create an account here.
It's free, but we have to do that.
And once you did create that
account and then sign in
on this page, the download
will start, of this JDK tool,
which we now need to fix this
error which we got during
building this Android
app with Flutter here.
So let's wait for this download to finish,
and then we can simply walk
through this installer,
keep all the defaults here,
and install this Java development kit,
which Android needs under the hood.
And you might not need that
because in some installations,
this is set up correctly
right from the start.
For me here it wasn't.
I'll also confirm the defaults here
and install Java itself and make sure that
all these tools are installed here.
And once this was installed successfully,
you can go back and you
can run flutter run again,
and now this time, it should succeed here
and it should build this application.
And it now also sends
this application queue,
this Android emulator, which
is up and running here.
And here, you can now play
around with this starting app,
which you get if you
use my attached files,
the main.dart file and
the pubspec.yaml file
as instructed earlier.
And this is now our Flutter
project, our Flatter app,
running as a native Android
app on this Android simulator.
And now that this is up and running
with that flutter run
process, which is a process
that is still running, we
can actually now go into
one of our code files here
and then search that line
where counter plus plus
is executed, line 58,
and change that a little bit.
Now, by the way, I will
explain all that code
and how Dart and Flutter work
throughout this entire course.
For the moment, we'll just
make a quick change here
and change line 58 to say
underscore counter equals
underscore counter plus two.
If you then save this file
by pressing control, S
so that you don't have this bullet next to
the file name anymore,
then you don't have to run
flutter run again to see this
change in the running app,
but instead with this ongoing
process that was started
by executing flutter
run, we can now press R
to perform a so-called hot
reload, which basically means
that our updated code is
injected into this running app,
which is a quick way of seeing changes
without restarting everything.
So therefore now, if I press R,
this hot reload is performed,
and now if I click the plus here,
this counter changes by two
instead of one as before
because of this code change,
which is reflected by this hot reload.
Alternatively, you can also
perform a so-called hot restart
by pressing shift, R, which
will then also still be quicker
than running flutter run
again, but which will restart
that app that's running on the emulator,
which is why now the
counter is reset to zero.
And that's how we could
run our application here.
Now, I am saying could
because whilst this works,
it can be a bit annoying
that we have to press R
or shift, R all the time.
Therefore, I'll quit this
running flatter run process
by pressing control, C
here in this terminal
and confirming it with Y,
and I'll close this terminal
because since we installed
that Flutter extension earlier,
we also have a different
way of running our projects,
our Flutter projects as apps on emulators,
and that will be the way I
use throughout this course.
We can go to run and then
choose run without debugging.
Later in the course, we will
also dive into debugging,
but for now, let's run
it without debugging.
And this now also runs
flutter run under the hood,
but we don't see it here.
We don't actively have to run this.
We still get a terminal
window here, but that's now
actually just a little output window,
which shows info messages
and possible warnings to us,
and then we get prompted
whether we want to open
the Dart dev tools.
I'll not do that here.
We will see them later, so
I'll choose not now for now,
and again, we'll have our
app here on this emulator,
but now we have this
control panel up here,
where we also could perform a hot reload
or a hot restart by
clicking on these buttons
or using the shortcuts which you see here.
And we can always stop
this running process
by pressing this stop button,
but the great thing is that if
you start your app like this,
you don't even have to
use the hot reload button.
If I change my code, for
example, to say plus three,
and I then save this, it
will automatically perform
this hot reload, so it
detects file changes.
So whenever we save a changed file,
and will automatically
update the running app here.
And that's of course even more convenient
than manually triggering those updates
with R or shift, R,
and therefore, that's
how I will run my apps.
And if you are done for today,
you can always stop this process,
and then the app is shut
down on the emulator,
and if you want to work on it again,
you just start this again.
And that's what we'll do
throughout the course,
and of course, in the course,
I will then also explain
all that code and how
Flutter and Dart work.
Now, feel free to also tweak
the appearance of Visual Studio Code
here with the appearance menu.
You can show and hide the
sidebars and various other areas
so that you like your editor.
So make sure you tweak it like that,
and then therefore, we are
now done and we can continue.
Now, I will say that throughout
the rest of the course,
I am working on Mac,
but the code you write
is exactly the same, so it
won't make a difference for you,
and I also will be using
the Android emulator
throughout the course so
that's exactly the same
for you also if you use Windows.
So just because I'm using
Mac in the next lectures,
and in this entire course,
does not mean that you need
to change anything or that
you can't follow along.
You can follow along just fine
because the code will be the same.